AmericanRhetoric.com
George W. Bush
Rose Garden Speech on Israel­Palestine Two­State Solution

Delivered 24 June 2002, Washington, D.C.

For too long, the citizens of the Middle East have lived in the midst of death and fear. The hatred of a few
holds the hopes of many hostage. The forces of extremism and terror are attempting to kill progress and
peace by killing the innocent. And this casts a dark shadow over an entire region. For the sake of all
humanity, things must change in the Middle East.
It is untenable for Israeli citizens to live in terror. It is untenable for Palestinians to live in squalor and
occupation. And the current situation offers no prospect that life will improve. Israeli citizens will continue to
be victimized by terrorists, and so Israel will continue to defend herself.
In the situation the Palestinian people will grow more and more miserable. My vision is two states, living side
by side in peace and security. There is simply no way to achieve that peace until all parties fight terror. Yet,
at this critical moment, if all parties will break with the past and set out on a new path, we can overcome the
darkness with the light of hope. Peace requires a new and different Palestinian leadership, so that a
Palestinian state can be born.
I call on the Palestinian people to elect new leaders, leaders not compromised by terror. I call upon them to
build a practicing democracy, based on tolerance and liberty. If the Palestinian people actively pursue these
goals, America and the world will actively support their efforts. If the Palestinian people meet these goals,
they will be able to reach agreement with Israel and Egypt and Jordan on security and other arrangements
for independence.
And when the Palestinian people have new leaders, new institutions and new security arrangements with
their neighbors, the United States of America will support the creation of a Palestinian state whose borders
and certain aspects of its sovereignty will be provisional until resolved as part of a final settlement in the
Middle East.

Transcription by Michael E. Eidenmuller. Property of AmericanRhetoric.com ©Copyright 2010. All rights reserved.

Page 1

AmericanRhetoric.com
In the work ahead, we all have responsibilities. The Palestinian people are gifted and capable, and I am
confident they can achieve a new birth for their nation. A Palestinian state will never be created by terror ­­ it
will be built through reform. And reform must be more than cosmetic change, or veiled attempt to preserve
the status quo. True reform will require entirely new political and economic institutions, based on
democracy, market economics and action against terrorism.
Today, the elected Palestinian legislature has no authority, and power is concentrated in the hands of an
unaccountable few. A Palestinian state can only serve its citizens with a new constitution which separates
the powers of government. The Palestinian parliament should have the full authority of a legislative body.
Local officials and government ministers need authority of their own and the independence to govern
effectively.
The United States, along with the European Union and Arab states, will work with Palestinian leaders to
create a new constitutional framework, and a working democracy for the Palestinian people. And the United
States, along with others in the international community will help the Palestinians organize and monitor fair,
multi­party local elections by the end of the year, with national elections to follow.
Today, the Palestinian people live in economic stagnation, made worse by official corruption. A Palestinian
state will require a vibrant economy, where honest enterprise is encouraged by honest government. The
United States, the international donor community and the World Bank stand ready to work with Palestinians
on a major project of economic reform and development. The United States, the EU, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund are willing to oversee reforms in Palestinian finances, encouraging
transparency and independent auditing.
And the United States, along with our partners in the developed world, will increase our humanitarian
assistance to relieve Palestinian suffering. Today, the Palestinian people lack effective courts of law and
have no means to defend and vindicate their rights. A Palestinian state will require a system of reliable
justice to punish those who prey on the innocent. The United States and members of the international
community stand ready to work with Palestinian leaders to establish finance ­­ establish finance and monitor
a truly independent judiciary.
Today, Palestinian authorities are encouraging, not opposing, terrorism. This is unacceptable. And the
United States will not support the establishment of a Palestinian state until its leaders engage in a sustained
fight against the terrorists and dismantle their infrastructure. This will require an externally supervised effort
to rebuild and reform the Palestinian security services. The security system must have clear lines of
authority and accountability and a unified chain of command.
America is pursuing this reform along with key regional states. The world is prepared to help, yet ultimately
these steps toward statehood depend on the Palestinian people and their leaders. If they energetically take
the path of reform, the rewards can come quickly. If Palestinians embrace democracy, confront corruption
and firmly reject terror, they can count on American support for the creation of a provisional state of
Palestine.

Transcription by Michael E. Eidenmuller. Property of AmericanRhetoric.com ©Copyright 2010. All rights reserved.

Page 2

AmericanRhetoric.com
With a dedicated effort, this state could rise rapidly, as it comes to terms with Israel, Egypt and Jordan on
practical issues, such as security. The final borders, the capital and other aspects of this state's sovereignty
will be negotiated between the parties, as part of a final settlement. Arab states have offered their help in
this process, and their help is needed.
I've said in the past that nations are either with us or against us in the war on terror. To be counted on the
side of peace, nations must act. Every leader actually committed to peace will end incitement to violence in
official media, and publicly denounce homicide bombings. Every nation actually committed to peace will stop
the flow of money, equipment and recruits to terrorist groups seeking the destruction of Israel ­­ including
Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and Hezbollah. Every nation actually committed to peace must block the shipment of
Iranian supplies to these groups, and oppose regimes that promote terror, like Iraq. And Syria must choose
the right side in the war on terror by closing terrorist camps and expelling terrorist organizations.
Leaders who want to be included in the peace process must show by their deeds an undivided support for
peace. And as we move toward a peaceful solution, Arab states will be expected to build closer ties of
diplomacy and commerce with Israel, leading to full normalization of relations between Israel and the entire
Arab world.
Israel also has a large stake in the success of a democratic Palestine. Permanent occupation threatens
Israel's identity and democracy. A stable, peaceful Palestinian state is necessary to achieve the security that
Israel longs for. So I challenge Israel to take concrete steps to support the emergence of a viable, credible
Palestinian state.
As we make progress towards security, Israel forces need to withdraw fully to positions they held prior to
September 28, 2000. And consistent with the recommendations of the Mitchell Committee, Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied territories must stop.
The Palestinian economy must be allowed to develop. As violence subsides, freedom of movement should
be restored, permitting innocent Palestinians to resume work and normal life. Palestinian legislators and
officials, humanitarian and international workers, must be allowed to go about the business of building a
better future. And Israel should release frozen Palestinian revenues into honest, accountable hands.
I've asked Secretary Powell to work intensively with Middle Eastern and international leaders to realize the
vision of a Palestinian state, focusing them on a comprehensive plan to support Palestinian reform and
institution­building.
Ultimately, Israelis and Palestinians must address the core issues that divide them if there is to be a real
peace, resolving all claims and ending the conflict between them. This means that the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 will be ended through a settlement negotiated between the parties, based on U.N.
Resolutions 242 and 338, with Israeli withdrawal to secure and recognize borders.
We must also resolve questions concerning Jerusalem, the plight and future of Palestinian refugees, and a
final peace between Israel and Lebanon, and Israel and a Syria that supports peace and fights terror.

Transcription by Michael E. Eidenmuller. Property of AmericanRhetoric.com ©Copyright 2010. All rights reserved.

Page 3

AmericanRhetoric.com
All who are familiar with the history of the Middle East realize that there may be setbacks in this process.
Trained and determined killers, as we have seen, want to stop it. Yet the Egyptian and Jordanian peace
treaties with Israel remind us that with determined and responsible leadership progress can come quickly.
As new Palestinian institutions and new leaders emerge, demonstrating real performance on security and
reform, I expect Israel to respond and work toward a final status agreement. With intensive effort by all, this
agreement could be reached within three years from now. And I and my country will actively lead toward
that goal.
I can understand the deep anger and anguish of the Israeli people. You've lived too long with fear and
funerals, having to avoid markets and public transportation, and forced to put armed guards in kindergarten
classrooms. The Palestinian Authority has rejected your offer at hand, and trafficked with terrorists. You
have a right to a normal life; you have a right to security; and I deeply believe that you need a reformed,
responsible Palestinian partner to achieve that security.
I can understand the deep anger and despair of the Palestinian people. For decades you've been treated as
pawns in the Middle East conflict. Your interests have been held hostage to a comprehensive peace
agreement that never seems to come, as your lives get worse year by year. You deserve democracy and
the rule of law. You deserve an open society and a thriving economy. You deserve a life of hope for your
children. An end to occupation and a peaceful democratic Palestinian state may seem distant, but America
and our partners throughout the world stand ready to help, help you make them possible as soon as
possible.
If liberty can blossom in the rocky soil of the West Bank and Gaza, it will inspire millions of men and women
around the globe who are equally weary of poverty and oppression, equally entitled to the benefits of
democratic government.
I have a hope for the people of Muslim countries. Your commitments to morality, and learning, and tolerance
led to great historical achievements. And those values are alive in the Islamic world today. You have a rich
culture, and you share the aspirations of men and women in every culture. Prosperity and freedom and
dignity are not just American hopes, or Western hopes. They are universal, human hopes. And even in the
violence and turmoil of the Middle East, America believes those hopes have the power to transform lives
and nations.
This moment is both an opportunity and a test for all parties in the Middle East: an opportunity to lay the
foundations for future peace; a test to show who is serious about peace and who is not. The choice here is
stark and simple. The Bible says, "I have set before you life and death; therefore, choose life." The time has
arrived for everyone in this conflict to choose peace, and hope, and life.
Thank you very much.

Transcription by Michael E. Eidenmuller. Property of AmericanRhetoric.com ©Copyright 2010. All rights reserved.

Page 4

